Hey guys, welcome back to the course.
So in this lecture, we're going to jump into WordPress, like I promised.
We're going to look at how it works and what it looks like.
The idea here is just to get some basic familiarity with it,
should, God forbid, you ever have to install this monstrosity.
So this is what it looks like when you search
for WordPress and you go to WordPress.com.
Looks kind of like a business, and the key
kind of giveaway here is it says "see plans."
Now, remember, I said that WordPress is free.
Well, that is actually still true, and I'm
going to explain that here in just a second.
So on WordPress.com, you get kind of all the basics about it,
it's great for websites, it's great for blogs,
it pitches you on some reasons why you should use it,
you're probably weirded out by this premium plans part.
And this was a correction, it powers 26% of the internet, I think I said 22%.
Good Lord.
This is what confuses people a lot of times,
there's actually WordPress.com, and there's WordPress.org.
So WordPress.org, on the other hand, is where you could actually go,
and I've seen this happen way too often, and install this just for free.
So I see people all the time going to .com and paying for the same exact thing.
I think the basic idea is that WordPress.com, they sell the same packages,
just with more updates, and more features, and things plugged into it.
That's kind of a trick though, is that WordPress.org,
the normal, free, open source version of it
has access to all these plugins anyway, it's just a little more effort to put together,
so it's not really worth going to .com and paying the extra.
If you're curious, the company that makes a lot of these plugins,
and a lot of these themes and extensions for WordPress is called Automattic,
and that's what the fonder of WordPress does
now, he runs this company called Automattic,
so if you're on .com, it will push you towards a lot of the ones made by Automattic.
Ok, so if you go to WordPress.org, you just download the newest one.
The newest one, as we're speaking right now, is 4.6.1,
I'm sure in the future when you guys are watching this, it's going to be 7.8.2,
but whatever. It hasn't changed a ton in the last five years, really.
The biggest change we've seen over the last couple of years with WordPress is that
they are now focused more on mobile, kind of like everyone,
they've reset up their entire system to compete with
a lot of the CMS systems out there that focus on mobile websites first,
so now they have a lot of different options, more plugins, and more extensions,
and it just naturally is easier to use for mobile sites.
They even have a setup now where you can make mobile apps through WordPress,
which, I don't know, it's entirely too new to really cover right now.
Ok, so typically what you would do is you'd want to download it,
and you want to go to your web host,
in this example I'm using 1and1,
and ideally what you want to do is you just
then take that and upload it to your server.
Remember, we used FTP before, it's relatively easy.
When you download WordPress, it comes as a zip file,
you just unzip it, and it comes out as this folder, WordPress,
then you upload it to your server.
It creates a little bit of a weird setup, but for the most part,
you can then look at this and say, "Oh, that is how I access it."
Now, how does one set up WordPress?
Well, that's similar to the other ones.
WordPress really, really likes to harp on this
a lot, you'll see it all over their copywriting,
is that they became popular, or at least
they hit an inflexion point with their adoption
when they figured out a way to make their system install in five minutes or less.
So it used to be the case that when you installed something, it just took a while,
there was a lot of individual pieces you had to plug in for CMS systems.
They just made it one simple system, all in a wrapper,
and it should take you five minutes.
So let's go to that actual address we've seen,
and let's see if it actually does take five minutes.
So when you go here, it just asks you language, I speak English,
it asks you for some information about your database.
In order to get that, you typically have to go back to your web server
and look up the names for your SQL, probably SQL database.
In my case, I had to go back to 1and1, and I had to create a SQL database setup,
when you do that, it's usually pretty accessible
depending on the web server you're using,
mine is over here, I just go to MySQL database, and I just set one up.
So here's my information, and I will copy that over, and move on to the next step.
All right, so that worked out, and now we get to run the install,
it's just going to ask you a whole bunch of questions about
how you want to login, what you want your site to be called.
Wordpressy site is what we'll call it,
username, udemystudents, please don't actually login to this and hack my account,
and we'll put my email address, and we'll use a masked email.
All right, then I just hit "install,"
and it says success.
Ok, great. So now I can login and it's going to show me
that gigantic administration panel that WordPress is so known for.
Ok, so this is basically what WordPress is.
So now I have installed it on my server.
All I do really is just login by going to
wp-admin, and this is where I build the website.
If you were to go to my website, just WordPress, without this wp-admin,
it would pull up whatever site I'm actually creating,
it's usually pretty useful to have it in a separate window,
or you edit it here and then look at it in a separate section.
So here it has a lot of walkthroughs, where you can customize your site,
or write your first blog post, bla bla bla, manage widgets and menus.
Really it's up to you.
They're trying to make it more user-friendly just in general.
So the lingo you need to know - themes.
A theme is a template that you can put onto your website,
and it'll determine a lot of different things, what does it look like,
what forms you have, what is the main function of your site,
and then it's usually easier to modify that closer to what you want.
Plugin. A plugin is like a miniature application that plugs into WordPress,
in that case it might be something like a popup,
you know, you're going to have a popup
that tries to collect their email address,
like a sumome.com, you'd use a plugin, and then an extension is generally
a large piece of another code base you're attaching to WordPress.
So let's say I wanted to make a forum on WordPress, well,
I'd go and download an extension that gives me a lot of the functionality
that a forum would have, and so I'd attach that to it.
Now, if I wanted to add some themes, there's a million places to go.
I'm not even joking, there's so many places you can go to get themes for this.
I'd probably just go to WordPress.org/themes.
Here, we can see a lot of free ones, and
that's kind of their thing on WordPress.org,
they're not trying to charge you money.
On WordPress.com, try to look for a theme there,
yes, they would gladly charge you money.
So here, you can see a lot of different themes, up to you to download it.
The way that these generally work is you download it as a package, and then
when you're in the admin panel, it's going to ask you to set your theme,
and you just navigate on your computer to that theme, and it should integrate it.
So, back in the panel, what I could do is
I could go to "change your theme completely,"
and here are actually the embedded ones that they give you for free,
there's a lot of free ones everywhere, but
these are the ones that just come installed on it.
So let's say I wanted Twenty Fourteen, which looks
kind of like a photo blog, or something like that.
This is the live preview that doesn't usually seem to work.
So I could save and activate it, and then if I navigated towards the site,
it would generally speaking work. Let's see.
And see, right there, ok?
So this is the site that I just put up, and now that I had that theme installed,
as soon as I add content onto it, or photos, it'll start organizing it
a bit more like that preview we saw here.
Now, if I wanted to add a new one, I go to "add new"
and just pull it out of that package that we had before.
So I go to "upload," and then I would just pick the one we had before.
So, in this case, what I would do is actually go to the zip diversion,
apparently that's how it likes to take it, and "install now."
Ok, there we go. And so, now it's installed.
I can live preview it, I can activate it.
Let's just activate it, and then we should see something
close to that one that we downloaded and installed.
So, now I can go there, just refresh it, might
have to clear the cache, but there you go.
So that was, as you can see it has some of the similarities.
Again, once you start adding content to it, photos, blog posts, all that stuff,
it will start actually looking like it.
Ok guys, so this is WordPress, this is pretty much how they set up themes,
plugins, extensions, there are millions and millions of themes out there,
some are paid, a lot of them are free.
You pick what you want and then essentially you activate the one you want,
and then over here you have the options
of adding posts, and media, and bla bla bla.
You can add widgets, and menus, and headers, a lot you can do here.
Even down here, in users, you can control the people that have signed up,
if you have a membership profile, something like that, that's where you do this.
Now, if you had installed an extension, it would show up over here,
so then you'd be able to focus on the features that extension brings to you.
All right guys, so that's pretty much what that looks like.
You don't need to go too far into that one.
I would suggest that if you ever have free time and you're bored,
install this one, and just dink around.
Why? Because 26% of the internet is on
WordPress, so it's worth getting used to it.
All right guys, see you in the next lecture!